Information is at the core of just about
everything we do in the world of data
analytics.
And an awful lot of the data we
use is in some way, shape or
form related to real people.
Increasingly concerns are being raised in
the public about the amount of information
that is stored and accessible by both
private organizations and governments.
This includes the risk of identity theft
and other adverse consequences for
consumers and citizen.
Should data that they considered private
somehow be made public or use for
purposes that are unsanctioned
by individuals in question.
In our rules as data analyst, when the
most critical questions we have to ask is
how can we or how should we use data.
In this video we're going to take a broad
look at the idea of the data privacy
by introducing four levels of standards,
the guide how we use data that
might be considered sensitive.
However, we're not going to go into
a lot of detail for a couple of reasons.
First, the set of laws and regulations
that govern data privacy is extensive and
very complex and those regulations
differ depending on where you are.
Secondly, the data privacy landscape
is changing very rapidly and
what's true today might
not be true tomorrow.
Nonetheless, what we will do is give you
a sense for some common definitions and
the types of regulations
that are out there.
Our discussion will be slanted towards
the data privacy environment in
the United States but the same basic
ideas will apply more globally.
Let's outline these four
levels of standards.
The top level is legal standards
which was established by law,
order, or rule to compel treatment
of certain classes of data.
Legal standards must be followed by
any organizations subject to them.
There's not a lot of
choice in the matter and
consequences can be severe if
legal standards are not followed.
The second level is ethical standard.
These standards
are established by industry or
professional organizations which see
to achieve some level of non-legally
binding treatment of information.
There can be consequences for
violating these standards but
they are usually imposed
outside of the courts.
The third level of standards
are policy standards,
which are internal standards established
by an organization to guide its own
treatment of data, usually through
something like a privacy policy.
The company decides how to
enforce these standards.
The last level of standards is simply
what we might call good judgment.
Even if some action is not prohibited
by legal, ethical, or policy standards.
We should always ask ourselves,
is this really a good idea and
what might the consequences of
using data in certain way be?
We're going to go into each of these
areas in a bit more detail but
we'll spend the most time
discussing a few types of data and
the legal standards attached to them.
Let's start with something called
Personally Identifiable Information
or PII.
Like most terms associated with data
privacy, PII has a long definition.
As defined by the US National Institutes
of Standard or NIST, PII includes
any information about an individual
maintained by an agency including.
One, any information that can
be used to distinguish or
trace an individual's identity such
as name, social security number,
date and place of birth,
mother/maiden name or biometric records.
And two, any other information that is
linked or linkable to an individual,
such as medical, educational,
financial, and employment information.
Here are some examples of
what is considered PII.
All or part of someone's name,
including maiden name.
Any identification number,
address information, personal physical
characteristics including images.
And any number of things
that may be linked to one or
more of these definitive identifiers.
The linked data part of the PII
definition is particularly interesting,
as it includes just about anything that I
could conceivably link to an individual.
In the area of Internet connectivity and
big data
the ability to link information across
desperate domains has never been greater.
In fact, both the National Institution of
Standards and the US Office of Management
and Budget, OMB have recognized how easy
it might be to identifying individuals.
Let's read part of their findings.
A common misconception is that PII only
includes data that can be used to directly
identify or
contact an individual or personal
data that is especially sensitive.
The OMB and
NIST definition of PII is broader.
The definition is also dynamic and
can depend on context.
Data elements that may not an identifying
individual directly for example, age,
height, birth date, may nonetheless
constitute PIl if those data
elements can be combined with or without
additional data to identify an individual.
In other words, if the data are linked or
can be linked to the specific
individual it is potentially PII.
Moreover, what can be personally
linked to an individual
may depend on what technology
is available to do so.
As technology advances, computer programs
may scan the Internet with wider scope
to create a mosaic of
information that maybe used to
link information to an individual in
ways that were not previously possible.
This is often referred
to as the mosaic effect.
The implications of this
mosaic effect are significant.
Let's put a really fine point
on this with a little math.
Let's assume that we can find some number
of characteristics on which people differ.
To keep it simple, let's say that each
characteristic can only have two values
like male or female, homeowner or
renter, married or not married, etc.
It turns out that the number of different
types of people I can have with
n attributes of two values
each is two to the n.
So how many people is that?
Let's say that we can
assemble 29 attributes.
With 29 attributes, we can describe up to
just over 500 million types of people,
which is significantly more than the US
population of about 320 million.
What if have just a few more attributes,
say 33?
With 33 attributes, we could describe
eight and a half billion types of people
which is more than the world wide
population of about 7.4 billion people.
Shall we keep going?
Let's do one more.
With 37 attributes we could describe
over 137 billion types of people which
is more than the estimated 108 billion
people that have ever lived on the Earth.
The point is this, it takes a surprisingly
small number of data points to uniquely
identify a very large number of people.
Of course those data points need to
be the right ones but you can see
how this mosaic effect can have a very
real implication on data privacy.
What's really interesting about PII
is that while there are quite a few
legal standards they tend to be narrowly
associated with specific government
agencies or specific use cases
especially in the United States.
International standards are a bit more
stringent but there's surprisingly little
over arching legislation that restricts
how personal information can be used.
Here's a short list of some of the
regulations that do cover PII in some way.
We won't go through them, but you can use
this as a reference point should you need
to understand PII standards more deeply.
The second type of information we'll
discuss is consumer financial information,
or CFI.
CFI is defined in the US by
the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act,
also known as the Financial Services
Modernization Act of 1999, as follows.
CFI is any information that
is not publicly available.
And that a consumer provides to
a financial institution to obtain
a financial product or
service from the institution.
Results from a transaction
between the consumer and
the institution involving
a financial product or service.
Or that a financial institution otherwise
obtains about a customer in connection
with providing a financial product or
service.
This definition is further incorporated
into a variety of Federal Trade Commission
and Securities and
Exchange Commission guidelines, as well
as into the Fair Credit Reporting Act.
Regulations around CFI are a little
more concrete than those around PII.
Here are some general
information of CFI legislation.
First, it generally applied
to financial institutions and
those who collect nonpublic personal
information from customers, consumers or
financial institutions.
They include a number of specific
provisions and how account numbers and
other specific pieces of
information must be treated.
However, most of the rules
are around disclosure
versus prescription of what's allowed or
not allowed.
This means that they don't so much
restrict what we can do with information,
but rather outline what we need to tell
customers about that information and
what options customers must have to
restrict use of their information.
And important detail here is that these
regulations default when opt-out posture.
Meaning that if customers don't want
information using certain ways,
they must actively
opt-out from those users.
So that's customer financial Information.
Let's move on to another type
of customer information called
customer proprietary network
information or CPNI.
CPNI is collected by telecommunications
companies about a customers
telephone calls.
It includes the time, date, duration and
destination number of each call.
The type of network
a customer subscribes to and
any other information that appears
on the customer's telephone bill.
Importantly, this definition does
not explicitly include non-telephone
activity like web browsing.
Although they were varying legal
opinions on wether this type of
information is covered
under CPNI regulations.
CPNI regulations are generally governed by
the US Telecommunications Act of 1996 and
the 2007 Federal Communications Commission
or FCC CPNI Order.
There are also broader statutes like the
Electronic Communications Privacy Act of
1986 and the Communications Assistance for
Law Enforcement Act of 1994 or
CALEA which speak to the conditions
under which the government can access to
this and other types of electronic data.
Here's some key provisions
of CPNI legislation.
First, it limits the information which
carriers may provide the third-party
marketing firms without first securing the
affirmative consent of their customers.
It also defines when and
how customers service representatives
may share call details.
It establishes notification and reporting
obligations for carriers as well as
identity verification procedures
including a specific requirement.
The verification processes
must include a match
between information provided by a person
and what is shown in a company's systems.
There are a couple of interesting
details to these rules.
For one thing, they do allow a company
to freely share information with
any other communications company which
is a pretty broad set of players.
Secondly, like CFI rules, CPNI regulations
take an opt-out posture by default.
The last type of information we'll talk
about is Protected Health Information or
PHI.
PHI is considered one of the most
sensitive types of information and
consequently it's among those
tightly controlled and regulated.
In the US, PHI is defined under
the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act of 1996 or HIPAA.
The definition is three parts and
reflects the detail involved.
One, PHI is created or received by
a health care provider, health plan,
employer, or health care clearinghouse.
Two, it relates to the past, present or
future physical or mental health or
condition of an individual,
the provision of health care to
an individual or the past, present or
future payment for the provision
of health care to an individual.
And which either identifies
the individual or
with respect to which there is
a reasonable basis to believe
the information can be used
to identify the individual.
And three,
is maintained in electronic media,
or transmitted or
maintained in any other form or medium.
The provisions of HIPAA around
PHI are pretty complex and
we won't get into the details here.
However, there are broadly
covered under our privacy rule
which speaks to the safeguards that must
be taken to protect PHI in any form.
And a security role which provides
additional measures that must be taken
when information is stored electronically.
The rules applied to health care
providers, health plans and
health care clearinghouses.
And they include a lot of specific
provisions around how certain types of
data need to be treated including the
stripping out of identifiable information
in other precaution.
There are a couple of important
exclusions to HIPAA regulations.
First, they exclude
education records covered by
the Family Educational Rights and
Privacy Act.
They also exclude employment records
held by a covered entity in its role
as employer.
Okay, that's a lot of information so
let's recap before we move on.
So far we have defined personally
identifiable information PII,
customer financial information, CFI,
customer proprietary network information,
CPNI and protected heath information PHI.
We've also covered the major
legal standards that apply to
each type of information including
major legislation and provision.
Now let's talk about some of those other
types of standards that influence how we
use data, starting with ethical standards.
Most academic, scientific, legal,
and medical fields have pretty well
established standards making bodies
that hold members accountable for
a broad set of ethical behaviors,
some of which include the use of data.
For example, in the US these might
include State Bar Association,
the American Medical Association, or
other field specific organizations.
For these more formal bodies,
the consequences of violating ethical
standards are usually sanctions or
being kicked out of the organization.
This can sometimes be pretty severe.
For example, a lawyer being disbarred
usually ends or severely limits his or
her career.
In the business world it turns out that
some of the more relevant ethics and
standards bodies operate
in the area of marketing,
which makes sense as we're generally
interacting with customers through some
sort of market activity or interface.
These include the direct
marketing association
which provides broad guidelines on
how to interact with customers.
The digital advertising alliance
which adds guidance on first party
data collection.
And the network advertising initiative
which addresses third-party
data collection and the practice of
sharing data through data exchanges.
However, the ability for
these types of organizations to enforce
their standards is much weaker.
Companies typically comply out of choice,
not out of necessity.
But it's generally good practice to
comply with these guidelines anyway.
In addition to both the legal and ethical
guidelines established by governments and
other external entities,
companies almost always establish their
own internal policies
regarding data privacy.
It's common practice to make these
policies available to customers and
even proactively ensure that
customers read and acknowledge them.
Each company can have different
permissions governing its privacy policy
but generally speaking these policies
outline what data is captured and
shared and usually outline opt out or
opt in procedure.
As a data analyst, it's really up to you
to ensure that you're aware of both the
legal and ethical standards that apply,
as well as your organization's
policies around use of data.
However, there's one final
standard that always applies
regardless of what other rules exist.
That standard is good judgment.
Think about what it is you're about to do.
Even if it's legal,
even if it's ethical and
even if it falls within corporate policy
it still might not be a good idea.
As a general rule if it doesn't feel
right chances are it's not a good idea.
If you think your customers would be
upset if they knew what you were doing
It may not be a good idea.
Here are few things to think as you
develop your own sixth sense for
what's good and what';s not.
The first is the creepiness factor.
We often use data and analytics to
provide the best most customized
offers that we can do our customers but
there is a fine line between
what's relevant and what's creepy.
Especially if the customer sees
things based on information they
don't know you have.
Put yourself in the customers used and
ask yourself how you perceive an action.
Secondly, it's generally a good idea
to stay out of the news especially for
the wrong reasons.
Ask yourself what the consequences would
be if your methods were made public and
everyone could see what you're doing.
Would there be a backlash?
A third thing to think about is what
the unintended consequences of your
actions might be.
You're obviously trying to get
customers to do one thing but
what if they did something else entirely,
how bad would that be?
Even if you were purely focused on
the economics of a decision without regard
to anything else and I'm definitely
not advocating that approach.
One might argue that you should end up
with a good decision almost all the time
if you properly asses the risk.
Most folks who get themselves
in the trouble fail to
accurately asses the huge downsides
associated with bad behavior.
Assume the worst and you're much more
likely to stay on the high road.
So in summary,
where data privacy is concerned,
you have four levels of standards
that can guide your behavior.
Legal standards, ethical standards, policy
standards, and above all, good judgement.
Heed them wisely, and you'll have
a longer and more successful career.